# 12.0.0 (beta)

## Unified the replication primitives and the GraphQL replication plugin 

Most of the GraphQL replication code has been replaced by using the replication primitives plugin internally.
This means many bugs and undefined behavior that was already fixed in the replication primitives, are now also fixed in the GraphQL replication.

Also the GraphQL replication now runs `push` in bulks. This means you either have to update your backend to accept bulk mutations, or set `push.batchSize: 1` and transform the array into a single document inside of the `push.queryBuilder()`.


## Allow to set a specific index

By default, the query will be send to the RxStorage, where a query planner will determine which one of the available indexes must be used.
But the query planner cannot know everything and sometimes will not pick the most optimal index.
To improve query performance, you can specify which index must be used, when running the query.

```ts
const query = myCollection
    .findOne({
      selector: {
        age: {
          $gt: 18
        },
        gender: {
          $eq: 'm'
        }
      },
      /**
       * Because the developer knows that 50% of the documents are 'male',
       * but only 20% are below age 18,
       * it makes sense to enforce using the ['gender', 'age'] index to improve performance.
       * This could not be known by the query planer which might have choosen ['age', 'gender'] instead.
       */
      index: ['gender', 'age']
    });
```


## Enforce primaryKey in the index

RxDB needs to have a deterministic sort order when documents are queried out of the RxStorage.
This ensure that the [EventReduce](https://github.com/pubkey/event-reduce) algorithm can work properly and does not give wrong results.
To ensure a deterministic sorting, we add the primary as last sort attribute to every query. This ensure that on documents that have the same attributes on all query relevant fields, still can be sorted in a deterministic way, not depending on which was written first.

In the past, this often lead to slow queries, because indexes where not constructed which that in mind.
Now RxDB will add the `primaryKey` to all indexes that do not contain it already.
If you have any collection with an custom index set, you need to run a [migration](https://rxdb.info/data-migration.html) when updating to RxDB version `12.0.0` so that RxDB can rebuild the indexes.


## Introduce `_meta` field

In the past, RxDB used a hacky way to mark documents as being from the remote instance during replication.
This is needed to ensure that pulled documents are not send to the backend again.
RxDB crafted a specific revision string and stored the data with that string.
This meant that it was not possible to replicate with multiple endpoints at the same time.
From now on, all document data is stored with an `_meta` field that can contain various flags and other values.
This makes it easier for plugins to remember stuff that belongs to the document.

**In the future**, the other meta fields like `_rev`, `_deleted` and `_attachments` will be moved from the root level
to the `_meta` field. This is **not** done in release `12.0.0` to ensure that there is a migration path.


## Removed RxStorage RxKeyObjectInstance

In the past, we stored local documents and internal data in a `RxStorageKeyObjectInstance` of the `RxStorage` interface.
In PouchDB, this has a [slight performance](https://pouchdb.com/guides/local-documents.html#advantages-of-local%E2%80%93docs) improvement compared to storing that data in 'normal' documents because it does not have to handle the revision tree.
But this improved performance is only possible because normal document handling on PouchDB is so slow.
For every other RxStorage implementation, it does not really mather if documents are stored in a query-able way or not. Therefore the whole `RxStorageKeyObjectInstance` is removed. Instead RxDB stored local documents and internal data in normal storage instances. This removes complexity and makes thing easier in the future. For example we could now migrate local documents or query them in some plugins.

## Refactor plugin hooks

In the past, an `RxPlugin` could add plugins hooks which where always added as last.
This meant that some plugins dependet on having the correct order when calling `addRxPlugin()`.
Now each plugin hook can be either defined as `before` or `after` to specify at which position of the current hooks
the new hook must be added.

## Local documents must be activated per RxDatabase/RxCollection

For better performance, the local document plugin does not create a storage for every database or collection that is created.
Instead you have to set `localDocuments: true` when you want to store local documents in the instance.

```js
// activate local documents on a RxDatabase
const myDatabase = await createRxDatabase({
    name: 'mydatabase',
    storage: getRxStoragePouch('memory'),
    localDocuments: true // <- activate this to store local documents in the database
});

myDatabase.addCollections({
  messages: {
    schema: messageSchema,
    localDocuments: true // <- activate this to store local documents in the collection
  }
});
```
