# 8.0.0-beta.1

State: **BETA**

## disableKeyCompression by default

Because the keyCompression was confusing and most users do not use it, it is now disabled by default. To migrate your old schema, if you have not excplicitly set `disableKeyCompression` in your schema, you should now set it to `false`.

## collection() now only accepts a RxJsonSchema as schema

In the past, it was allowed to set an `RxSchema` or an `RxJsonSchema` as `schema`-field when creating a collection. This was confusing and so it is now only allowed to use `RxJsonSchema`.

## required fields have to be set via array

In the past it was allowed to set a field as required by setting the boolean value `required: true`.
This is against the [json-schema-standard](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference/object.html#required-properties) and will make problems when using different schema-validation-modules. Therefore required fields must now be set via `required: ['fieldOne', 'fieldTwo']`.

## Setters are only callable on temporary documents
To be similar to mongoosejs, there was the possibility to set a documents value via `myDoc.foo = 'bar'` and later call `myDoc.save()` to persist these changes.
But there was the problem that we have no weak pointers in javascript and therefore we have to store all document-instances in a cache to run change-events on them and make them 'reactive'. To save memory-space, we reuse the same documents when they are used multiple times. This made it hard to determine what happens when multiple parts of an application used the setters at the same time. Also there was an undefined behavior what should happen when a field is changed via setter and also via replication before `save()` was called.

- To change document-data, use `RxDocument.atomicUpdate()` or `RxDocument.atomicSet()` or `RxDocument.update()`.
- The following document-methods no longer exist: `synced$`, `resync()`
- These methods are only useable on temporary documents: `set()`, `proxy-set`, `save()`

## multiInstance is now done via broadcast-channel
Because the [BroadcastChannel-API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Broadcast_Channel_API) is not useable in all browsers and also not in NodeJs, multiInstance-communication was hard. The hacky workarround was to use a pseudo-socket and regulary check if an other instance has emitted a `RxChangeEvent`.
This was expensive because even when the database did nothing, we wasted disk-IO and CPU by handling this.

To solve this waste, I spend one month creating [a module that polyfills the broadcast-channel-api](https://github.com/pubkey/broadcast-channel) so it works on old browsers, new browsers and even NodeJs. This does not only waste less ressources but also has a lower latency.

## Set QueryChangeDetection via RxDatabase-option

In the past, the QueryChangeDetection had to be enabled by importing the QueryChangeDetection and calling a function on it. This was strange and also did not allow to toggle the QueryChangeDetection on specific databases.
Now we set the QueryChangeDetection by adding the boolean field `queryChangeDetection: true` when creating the database.

## Reuse an RxDocument-protoptye per collection instead of adding getters/setters to each document
Because the fields of an `RxDocument` are defined dynamically by the schema and we could not use the `Proxy`-Object because it is not supported in IE11, there was one workarround used: Each time a document is created, all getters and setters where applied on it. This was expensive and now we use a different approach.
Once per collection, a custom RxDocument-protoptype and constructor is created and each RxDocument of this collection is created with the constructor.

## Rewritten the inMemory-plugin
The inMemory-plugin was written with some wrong estimations. I rewrote it and added much more tests. Also `awaitPersistence()` can now be used to check if all writes have already been replicated into the parent collection.
