
# 15.0.0 (beta)

The release [15.0.0](https://rxdb.info/releases/15.0.0.html) is used for major refactorings and API changes.

## Replication

Replication options (like url), are no longer used as replication state identifier. Changing the url without having to restart the replication, is now possible. This is useful if you change your replication url (like `path/v3/`) on schema changes and you do not want to restart the replication from scratch. You can even swap the replication plugin while still keeping the replication state. The [couchdb replication](../replication-couchdb.md) now also requires an `replicationIdentifier`.

## Use `crypto.subtle.digest` for hashing

Using `crypto.subtle.digest` from the native WebCrypto API is much faster, so RxDB now uses that as a default. If the API is not available, like in React-Native, the [ohash](https://github.com/unjs/ohash) module is used instead. Also any custom `hashFunction` can be provided when creating the [RxDatabase](../rx-database.md). The `hashFunction` must now be async and return a Promise.

## Fix attachment hashing

Hashing of attachment data to calculate the `digest` is now done from the RxDB side, not the RxStorage. If you set a custom `hashFunction` for the database, it will also be used for attachments `digest` meta data.

## Requires at least typescript version 5.0.0

We now use `export type * from './types';` so RxDB will not work on typescript versions older than 5.0.0.

## Memory RxStorage

Rewrites of the [Memory RxStorage](../rx-storage-memory.md) for better performance.
- Writes are 3x faster
- Find-by id is 2x faster


## Rewrite data migrator

The [data migration plugin](../data-migration.md) has been fully rewritten from scratch.

It now internally uses the replication protocol to do a one-time replication from the old collection to the new one. This makes the code more simple and ensures that canceled migrations (when the user closes the browser), can continue from the correct position.

Also it now handles multi-instance runtimes correctly. If multiple browser tabs are open, only one of them (per RxCollection) will run the migration.
Migration state events are propagated across browser tabs.

Documents with `_deleted: true` will also be migrated. This ensures that non-pushed deletes are not dropped during migrations and will
still be replicated if the client goes online again.

Replication states from the [RxReplication](../replication.md) are also migrated together with the normal data.
Previously a migration dropped the replication state which required a new replication of all data from scratch, even if the
client already had the same data as the server. Now the `assumedMasterState` and `checkpoint` are also migrated so that
the replication will continue from where it was before the migration has run.

## Set `eventReduce:true` as default

The [EventReduce algorithm](https://github.com/pubkey/event-reduce) is now enabled by default.

## Require string based `$regex`

Queries with a `$regex` operator must now be defined as strings, not with `RegExp` objects. `RegExp` are mutable objects, which was dangerous and caused hard-to-debug problems.
Also stringification of the $regex had bad performance but is required to send queries from RxDB to the RxStorage.


## RxLocalDocument.$ emits a document instance, not the plain data

This was changed in [v14](./14.0.0.md) for a normal RxDocument.$ which emits RxDocument instances. Same is not done for [local documents](../rx-local-document.md).

## Rename send$ to sent$

`myRxReplicationState.send$.subscribe` works only if the sending is successful. Therefore, it is renamed to `sent$`, not `send$`.

## Fix return type of .bulkUpsert

Equal to other bulk operations, `bulkUpsert` will now return an `error` and a `success` array. This allows to filter for validation errors and handle them properly.

## Add dev-mode check for disallowed $ref fields [DONE]

RxDB cannot resolve `$ref` fields in the schema because it would have a negative performance impact.
We not have a dev-mode check to throw a helpful error message if $refs are used in the schema.

## Renamed replication-p2p to replication-webrtc

I will add more p2p replication plugins in the future, which are not based on [WebRTC](../replication-webrtc.md).


## Changes to the RxStorage interface

- Added RxStorage.info() which returns the total amount of stored documents.
- Change response type of RxStorageInstance.bulkWrite() from indexeddb objects to arrays for better performance.

## Improve RxDocument property access performance

We now use the Proxy API instead of defining getters on each nested property. Also fixed [#4949](https://github.com/pubkey/rxdb/pull/4949)


## Add deno support

The RxDB test suite now also runs in the [deno](https://deno.com/) runtime. A [DenoKV](https://deno.com/kv) based RxStorage is in the makings.
